A Dzogchen Tögal Prayer
by Dzogchen Pema Rigdzin

om ah hung
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ
chöku kunzang yabyum la solwa depso
To the dharmakāya Samantabhadra and consort, I pray!
drukpa dorje changchen la solwa depso
To the lord of the sixth family, the great Vajradhara, I pray!
tönpa dorje sempa la solwa depso
To the teacher Vajrasattva, I pray!
rigdzin garab dorje la solwa depso
To the vidyādhara Garab Dorje, I pray!
guru shiri singha la solwa depso
To Guru Śrī Siṃha, I pray!
gagar rigdzin gyepo la solwa depso
To the eight vidyādharas of India, I pray!
chimé pema jungné la solwa depso
To the deathless Padmākara, I pray!
lhacham mandarawa la solwa depso
To the princess Mandāravā, I pray!
jé bang nyi shu tsa nga la solwa depso
To the king and subjects, the twenty-five disciples, I pray!
tertön gya dang tsa gyé la solwa depso
To the one hundred and eight treasure-revealers, I pray!
drinchen tsa gyü lama la solwa depso
To the gracious root and lineage gurus, I pray!
shyiwa shyibchu tsa nyi la solwa depso
To the forty-two peaceful deities, I pray!
dakpa rigdzin yabyum la solwa depso
To the pure vidyādhara and consort, I pray!
barwa traktung ngabchu la solwa depso
To the fifty blazing herukas, I pray!
chödak khandro dé nga la solwa depso
To the five classes of dharma-keeping ḍākinīs, I pray!
kasung damchen gyatso la solwa depso
To the ocean of oath-bound protectors, I pray!
chönyi ngön sum tongwar chin gyi lop shik
Inspire me with your blessings, so that I may directly see dharmatā reality!
nyam nang gong du pelwar chin gyi lop shik
Inspire me with your blessings, so that visionary experiences may develop and increase!
rigpa tsé pebpar chin gyi lop shik
Inspire me with your blessings, so that pure awareness may reach its full measure!
chönyi zésar khyolwar chin gyi lop shik
Inspire me with your blessings, so that I may attain the stage of exhaustion into dharmatā!
jalü khachö drubpar chin gyi lop shik
Inspire me with your blessings, so that I may accomplish the rainbow body!
powa chenpo jongpar chin gyi lop shik
Inspire me with your blessings, so that I may perfect the great transference!
tsé chik sangyé drubpar chin gyi lop shik
Inspire me with your blessings, so that I may attain buddhahood in a single lifetime!

Composed by Dzogchen Pema Rigdzin in the snowy wastes of Rudam.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2017.