A Liberating Reminder

by Khenpo Pema Vajra

I prostrate at the feet of the peerless guru!

Generally, the key points for taking the teachings of Buddha to heart are:Motivated by renunciation
and bodhicitta,To avoid non-virtue and put your effort into virtuous deeds,And to
train your mind as much as you can in the paths of sūtra and mantra,With the three noble principles,
six pāramitās and phases of generation and perfection,And to seal this with altruistic
intention and prayers of aspiration.Even if you were to die right now, what else is
there to do but this?

The key points for the path of the supreme vehicle in particular are:With a mind that sees the
guru as an actual Buddha,Pray, receive the four empowerments, and merge your mind with
his or her wisdom mind.Allow your body, speech and mind to settle, and, deeply relaxed both
physically and mentally,Let go of all deluded thoughts of past, present and future, and
ordinary mind and mental events,Recognizing how they lack basis and origin, and have never
been real.Allow them to vanish by themselves without trace.The mind as such is clear light,
the realm of awakening mind,Unaltered by thinking, untainted by temporary experience,Empty
and clear, like space, without centre or periphery.In a state of non-grasping, without
fixation, this is spacious and open.In a state of non-meditation, without distraction, the
stronghold is secured.Whatever thoughts arise as the expression of awareness, whether good
or bad,Do not block or indulge, accept or reject them, and do not entertain hope or fear.But
allow movement to settle by itself, liberated as dharmakāya,Like writing on water or
a snake uncoiling its own knots.This is the training, the exercise of thought: natural self-arising
and natural self-liberation.

When death arrives, all of a sudden,Eject your consciousness into the unborn, sky-like space
of awareness.With the guru's wisdom mind and your own mind inseparably united,Rest in an
experience of space-like infinity.This is the instruction for liberation into dharmakāya at
the time of death.

In the bardo of dharmatā, no matter what sounds, colours or rays of light may occur,Rest in
a state of pure and open awareness,Without grasping attachment, to gain liberation as sambhogakāya.If
you wander into the bardo of becoming,Then, like an arrow shot by a great archer,Proceed
directly to a pureland, such as the five realms where the great spirit of liberation
is rekindled.This is the instruction for liberation in the bardos.

Be kind enough to keep these instructions in mind.

Spoken by Pema Vajra, who holds the name of khenpo. May it be virtuous!

Maṅgalam!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2017. Updated 2019.