A Prayer to Shower Down the Rain of Wisdom
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

ngabgyé tsukgyen penchen bimala
Great paṇḍita Vimalamitra, crown jewel of five hundred scholars,
jalü pochen dorjé ku nyé shing
Who attained rainbow body of great transference—
chimé yeshe kuchen lama la
To the guru who obtained the deathless wisdom body,
solwa nying né deb so jingyi lob
I pray from the core of my heart: inspire me with your blessings!

kyedzok lam gyi denyi tar sön shying
The one who perfected the essence of the path of the generation and perfection stages,
naljor drubpé khyuchok ngedön gyi
Lord of accomplished yogins—
tenpé sokshing melong dorjé la
To the vital pillar of the teachings of definitive meaning, Melong Dorje,
solwa nying né deb so jingyi lob
I pray from the core of my heart: inspire me with your blessings!

nyikdü drubpa yong kyi khorlö gyur
Sovereign of all the siddhas of this degenerate age,
ösal nyingpö tenpa nyinmor jé
Sun of the teachings of the essence of clear light,
drenda kündral jetsün chö kyi jé
The noble Lord of Dharma entirely without equal—
kuma radzé shyab la solwa deb
Kumārarāja, at your feet I pray!

gyal kün khyentsé yeshe chikdü shing
Single embodiment of the wisdom and compassion of all the buddhas,
yongdzok tenpé ngadak longchenpa
Sovereign of all the teachings, Longchenpa—
jangchok tubwang nyipa künkhyen jer
To the omniscient master, a second lord of sages for the north,
nying né soldeb dak gyü jingyi lob
I pray from the core of my heart: transform my mind with your blessings!

jampal yang ngö tsangpa lhé metok
Intentional manifestation of Divine Flower of Brahmā, who was Mañjuśrī in person,1
samshyin jönpa khé dang drubpé jé
Lord of siddhas and paṇḍitas,
rangjung dorjé pema wangchen la
Rangjung Dorje Pema Wangchen —2
nying né soldeb dak gyü jingyi lob
To you I pray from the core of my heart: transform my mind with your blessings!

dampa nam la güpé soltab tü
Through the power of praying reverently to all these holy beings,
tokpé yeshe khong né charwa dang
May the wisdom of realization arise from within my mind,
ji ta jinyé khyenpé tsal chen dzok
May the wisdom of the nature and extent of all things be perfected,
drowé dön kün bemé lhündrub shok
And may the welfare of all beings be effortlessly and spontaneously accomplished!

Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö wrote this prayer at the request of Dochen Choktrul Rinpoche Tsewang Drakpa.

| Translated by Abraham Ta-Quan, 2020.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. “gsol 'debs ye shes char 'bebs/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos
kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 3: 93–94

Version: 1.2-20220130
↑ Tsangpa Lhayi Metok is an alternative name for Trisong Detsen.
↑ i.e., Jigme Lingpa