Advice on the View, Meditation, Action and Fruition

by Nyala Pema Düdul

Namo mahāguru buddhāya!

It is exceptional among all the tenets of the outer, inner and secret vehicles,It is the key
to crossing the ocean of excellent teachings in all their many aspects,And it is the single
point that's sufficient for understanding the buddhas' ultimate wisdom—Grant your blessings,
so that I may recognize my very own rigpa as the guru!

The view that is uncontrived, without basis or origin, the original condition:Let the view that
is primordial wisdom, devoid of thought, manifest!

Meditation that is sustained awareness, referenceless and free from grasping:Without ‘meditating’,
let the wisdom of clear light unfold in mind’s expanse!

Action that is spontaneous, taking whatever occurs as the path of yogic conduct:Let perceptions
and mind arise as the action of realizing ‘one taste’!

Beyond the duality of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, and free from hope and fear:Let the ultimate fruition
of reality-itself be actualized!

Now, for advice on the uncontrived, naturally arising view,Listen again, all you devoted disciples!


When you gain stability, abiding by the uncontrived natural state,There’s no need to look any
further: clear light dawns all by itself.There’s no need to meditate: mind’s nature is already
there.Distraction is impossible: awareness is its very essence.Movement dissipates
by itself: thoughts are purified like the sky.There’s no need for adjustment: just abide by
the empty-clarity.And no need for hope or fear: saṃsāra and nirvāṇa are equally free.

Listen again, all you disciples gathered here!

The mind that’s always been free has no defining marks.Even when looking, nothing is seen—it
is emptiness.But it is not an empty void—it’s aware and clear.Awareness and emptiness are
indivisible, pervasive like the sky,Without focus, all-penetrating, beyond coming and going.And
yet all manner of thoughts and perceptions arise.It is not existent, because it is
empty,It is not non-existent, because there's intrinsic awareness,Appearance and emptiness
are in union, realization's expressive power.Your own mind, undistracted, is the dharmakāya,And
the wisdom mind of the buddhas is dharmakāya too.These two are indivisible, merged
within clear light.When, out of this ground of emptiness-dharmakāya,Clear light dawns as its
expression, spontaneously perfect,Wisdom, love and capacity for action blaze in strength;Primordial
wisdom unfolds effortlessly and impartially;And buddha-forms and pure-lands arise
in boundless measure.

Listen again, all you disciples gathered here!

As for this old beggar’s practice,His view is Dzogchen, the Great Perfection;HIs meditation,
Mahāmudrā, the Great Seal;And his conduct, the Vinaya, pure and simple.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2015.