Advice on How to Put the Meaning of the Natural Great Perfection into Practice

by Patrul Rinpoche

Homage to the guru!

To you, who reveal directly the nature of primordial liberation,Which is the meaning of the
inconceivable Great Perfection,Omniscient father and son,[1] together with the heirs of your
lineage,And the guru, who is the glorious protector — at your feet I bow!

One's own present awareness, left as it is, in natural ease,Beyond qualities and flaws to be
added or removed, accepted or rejected,Is the unaltered, unchanging wisdom of pure awareness;And
to rest in this experience is to unite view and meditation.

To know how to meditate but not how to liberateIs akin to the concentration of the devas, it
is said.So it’s crucial that you have full confidence in liberation.

The concentration that calms and stills an active mindMight temporarily suppress the mental
afflictions,But unless you know the secret key that is self-liberation,Circumstances will
still trigger old maladies of thought!

If you understand the point of naturally occurring self-liberation,Thoughts of acceptance and
rejection will be like writing on water:They'll arise all of a sudden, then, failing to
take hold, disappear.When arising and liberation occur simultaneously,Negative thoughts cannot
remain: they arise but amass no karma.With instant realization, who is there to be benefitted
or harmed?

If you lack the crucial point of instantaneous liberation,Undercurrent thoughts and afflictions
will proliferate,And although you might simply notice them through mindfulness,Good and
bad thoughts will still generate hopes and fears,Accumulate karma, and becomes causes for
saṃsāra.

Thus, far greater than a thousand experiences of mental stillnessIs but a single instant of
naturally liberating pure awareness.Primordial liberation, natural liberation, liberation
upon arising, direct liberation and so onInclude all the keys to view, meditation and conduct,So
train in this crucial point of realizing self-liberation.

If you realize this point, there’s no need for other views or meditations.All positive thoughts
will continue to arise without attachment,And even as you apply yourself to virtue, you’ll
not feel superior or conceited.All negative thoughts will vanish, just like the snake's
own knots uncoiled;The five poisons will arise, but they'll be liberated naturally in an
instant.And neutral thoughts will subside by themselves in the awareness-expanse,Naturally
arising and naturally freed, like the path of a bird in flight.

The source of saṃsāra is discursive thought.If you’re confident in taking thoughts on the path
through liberation,Then, it is said, saṃsāra is freed within nirvāṇa’s sphere.

But if you lack this key to bringing adversity upon the pathThrough full confidence in liberation,Then
even though you make empty, theoretical pronouncements,Your own flaws and negative
character will be plain to see,Your stubborn five poisons worse than those of an ordinary
person.Why so? It is the fault of not understanding liberation.Therefore, since the crux
of view, meditation and conductComes down to confidence in the modes of liberation,It's
vital that you apply your realization to circumstances.

Although I lack these points in my own mind,By relying on the words of the omniscient guru,Who
was truly a buddha in person, I have written this without error.Since it contains the crucial
points of practice, keep it in your heart.

Sarva maṅgalam.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2018.