Advice for Palseng

by Dodrupchen Jigme Tenpe Nyima

I bow respectfully to the guru, Drimé Özer,And, with folded hands, pay homage.Here, a tiny droplet
of instruction fromThe omniscient guru, I shall now explain.

On the subject of what we call 'mind' (sems) and 'pure awareness' (rig pa), some common scriptures
say that all that is 'main mind' is mind, while cognition is what is 'clear and aware'.
They thus claim that mind is synonymous with consciousness (rnam shes), while awareness
is synonymous with cognition (shes pa). Yet such explanations are insufficient when it
comes to identifying mind and awareness as they are spoken of in the Dzogchen texts.

In Dzogchen, mind is the root of saṃsāric existence and includes a tendency to cling to things
as real; while pure awareness is the wisdom of settling evenly in accordance with intrinsic
reality (dharmatā). What is more, this is not like the mere common view of the Middle
Way; it is superior because it brings about a special kind of certainty through the reasoning
that proves how the buddhas' insight into how things are is present as the perfect ground
of ordinary beings' basic nature. On an ultimate level, both true existence and the absence
of true existence are understood to be equal, and all theoretical posturing is therefore
overcome in the face of ultimate reasoning. On the conventional level, too, this approach
is superior because it incorporates the practice of viewing all phenomena as infinite
purity.

This Dzogchen approach is also superior to the outer mantra vehicles, as it incorporates the
profound key point of seeing phenomena as buddha-forms and wisdom, then settling, without
contrivance, in the great natural condition. It is also superior to the vehicle of the transcendent
perfections because it involves viewing phenomena as infinite purity. And it is
superior to the outer mantra vehicles, because even though these tantras have deity yoga,
they do not have the view which recognises that, in their natural state, these appearances
have always been enlightened as buddha-forms and wisdom. It is also more profound than Mahāyoga
and Anuyoga, because there is no need to train in the generation and completion stages,
both of which involve effort. Instead, since all phenomena are recognised as primordial
enlightenment, and the radiance of pure great wisdom, it is sufficient simply to abide
by a recognition of this, relaxing in the nature of the ground.

This differs from the approach taken by some contemporary meditators, those who merely settle
in delusory perception without cutting attachment to reality at its very root, and without
realising the nature of infinite purity.

More details on how the nature of the conventional is buddha-forms and wisdom, or how ultimately
both pure and impure are alike in lacking true nature, as well as proofs of how appearances
are infinite purity and so on, can be found in the works of the omniscient Rongzom
and victorious Longchenpa.

In short, I wonder whether alternating in meditation between analysis, for as long as certainty
about these points has not yet arisen, and settling, when certainty has arisen and does
not wane, might not be an authentic means of sustaining this understanding.

Any foolish, mistaken analysis,Or foolish talk, triply invalid,[1]In what I have here set downIs
due to me, the foolish one.Still, if anything here is of value,Take it as your own adornment.

I, the youthful Jigme, wrote this in response to Palseng's request. May it be virtuous!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2015.