Prayer to the Gurus of the Dzogchen Lineage
by Dodrupchen Jigme Tenpe Nyima

emaho
Emaho!
rangrig trödral chöku kuntuzang
My very own pure awareness, dharmakāya Samantabhadra,
lhündrub gakmé longku dorjé sem
Spontaneously perfect and unceasing, saṃbhogakāya Vajrasattva,
zungjuk trulpé namrol garab jé
Manifest display of indivisible unity, Lord Garab Dorje—
ku sum lama nam la solwa deb
To these gurus of the three kāyas, I pray!

dzogchen tenpé ngadak jampal shé
Sovereign of the Dzogchen teachings, Mañjuśrīmitra,
drub nyi nor gyi bangdzö shiri sing
Treasury of the two kinds of attainment, Śrī Siṃha,
rabjam gyalwé chizuk pema jung
Embodiment of infinite victorious buddhas, Padmākara—
tsungdral lama nam la solwa deb
To these incomparable gurus, I pray!

tubten nyinmor jepo künkhyen jé
Sun of the Buddha’s teachings, omniscient Longchenpa,
rigdzin yong kyi chi jé jikme ling
Lord of all vidyādharas, Jigme Lingpa,
damchö mi nub gyaltsen bodhi tsen
Unwaning victory banner of the sacred Dharma, with the name of Bodhi—1
rikdzin lama nam la solwa deb
To these vidyādhara gurus, I pray!

damé gyalwa nyipa dzané shyab
Matchless Jñāna, who was like a second victorious buddha,2
kater chö kyi dzö dzin püntsok jung
Holder of the treasury of the Dharma of kama and terma, Phuntsok Jungné,3
lam dir möpa tobpa ratné tsen
One who is devoted to this path and holds the name of Ratna—4
drinchen lama nam la solwa deb
To these most gracious gurus, I pray!

detar solwa tabpé tu nü kyi
Through the power and strength of praying in this way,
dakchak dorjé rigdzin tsombu yi
May we who gather as a group of vajra awareness-holders,
wang shyi gyü min drib shyi yong jang shing
Mature our minds through the four empowerments and thoroughly purify the four obscurations,
rigdzin shyi tob ku shyi dré min té
So that we gain the four levels of a vidyādhara and the fruition of the four kāyas,
yeshe lamé sa chok tobpar shok
And reach the supreme stage of the unsurpassed Wisdom Guru!

Thus, at the request of the authentically disciplined bhikṣu Damchö Özer, this was written by
the one who merely resembles an heir of Śākyamuni, but is actually rich in hypocrisy and
deception, Jigme Tenpé Gyaltsen.5

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2019.

Source: 'jigs med bstan pa'i nyi ma. "rdzogs chen bla brgyud gsol 'debs/" in rDo grub chen ’jigs
med bstan pa’i nyi ma’i gsung ’bum. 7 vols. Chengdu: Si khron mi rigs dpe skrun khang,
2003. TBRC: W25007, vol. 1: 458
↑ i.e., The First Dodrupchen, Jigme Trinle Özer (1745–1821), who is also called Changchub Dorje,
Bodhi Vajra in Sanskrit.↑ Jñāna is the Sanskrit for Yeshe (ye shes) and this is therefore
a reference to Do Khyentse Yeshe Dorje (1800–1866).↑ i.e., the Second Dodrupchen Jigme
Phuntsok Jungné (1825?–1860?).↑ Possibly Lushul Khenpo Könchok Drönmé (1859–1936).↑ Damchö
Özer (d. 1927?), one of the so-called four great khenpos of Dodrupchen, is best known for
his opposition to Mipham’s interpretation of the Madhyamakālaṃkāra.