The Self-Radiance of Indestructible Awareness and Emptiness
An Aspiration towards the Meaning of the Indivisible Ground, Path and Fruition of the Great
Perfection Mañjuśrī
by Mipham Rinpoche

chok chu dü shyi deshek sé ché kyi
You embody the wisdom of all the bliss-gone buddhas and their heirs
yeshe kur gyur nyimé tsul changwa
Throughout the ten directions and four times, and keep to the way of non-duality –
jampel shyönnu nyampa nyi kyi ngang
Ever-youthful Mañjuśrī, ‘Gentle Splendour,’ the state of perfect equality:
char mé dön la lhun gyi drub gyur chik
May we spontaneously perfect the real meaning of non-action!

dö mé gönpo palden lama la
With the devotion of viewing the primordial protector and glorious guru
nyam nyi chökur tawé mögü kyi
As the enlightened body of truth, the dharmakāya of perfect equality,
dön gyü gongpé chinlap nying la pö
May the inspiration of the ultimate lineage be transferred into our hearts,
rigpa tsel gyi wangchen tobpar shok
And may we gain the great empowerment of the expression of awareness!

yé né né chir tsolwé drubpa dang
Primordially present and thus not forged through exertion,
wangpö khyepar sok la mi tö kyang
It does not depend on capacity or constitution;
lawé yi ma chepa sem kyi sang
As it is so simple, we doubt this mystery of the mind:
lamé mengak tob kyi tong gyur chik
Let the guru’s instructions give us the strength to see!

trö shing chépa kün tok nönma té
Elaboration and analysis are superfluities of thought,
tsal shying drubpa rang nyi ngelwé gyu
While seeking and cultivating serve only to exhaust.
mik shing gompa shir shying chingwé zeb
Focusing and meditating are traps that merely bind –
zukngü tröpa nang né chöpar shok
Let such painful complexity cease within the mind!

sam jö dral la tongwa gang mé kyang
Beyond thought and expression, there’s nothing that is seen.
ma tong lhagmar gyurpa gang yang mé
Nor is there more to it, something additional, unseen.
rang sem kho takchöpa zabmö dön
This is the profound point for the mind to ascertain.
tsönpar kawé dé nyi tokpar shok
May we realize this nature, so hard to point to and make plain!

trö kun ka né dak chir yö ta pang
Always pure, without complexity, it avoids the eternalist extreme.
rig dang lhün gyi drubpé mé ta dral
Rigpa’s radiance is spontaneously present, not a nihilistic void.
nyi su jö kyang tokpé juk tsul tsam
Although spoken of as two, that’s for ease of comprehension:
yermé jö dral nyampé dön tong shok
May we see the meaning of equality, beyond division and description!

di na tsubmö dawa ji shyin du
Like a finger pointing to the moon,
dang por yichö tsik gi tsön ché kyang
Reasoning and words show the way at first.
chö nyi rang bab yichö yul lé dé
But the natural state is no object of thought,
rang gi rang la len té tongwar shok
So let us turn within and thereby truly see!

di la salwar chawa ma tong shying
In this, you won't find anything to be removed,
shyak té drubpar chawa ma mikpé
Nor conceive of what could be added or produced.
gak drup tsolwé ma lé chönyi ngang
Dharmatā is unstained by efforts to block or cultivate:
lhun gyi népé dön la jukpar shok
May we arrive at the state that's spontaneously present!

shé jé shyi dang dröpar chépé lam
Although we might label a ground to be known,
tobja drebü chö su takpa yang
Path to be followed, or fruition to be attained,
rang shyin shi la namkhé gorim dra
In the natural state, these are like levels of space:
char mé dön la lhun gyi népar shok
Effortlessly, then, may we keep to true non-action!

trulwé dro tak ma dak khorwé chö
Impure saṃsāric phenomena, conceived in delusion,
dé lé lokpa dakpé nangwa yang
And their opposites too, labelled ‘pure appearance’,
tö né takpa nampar tröpé chö
Are dependent designations, elaborate projections:
trömé shi la mi né tong gyur chik
May we see their absence in the unelaborate condition!

lo dral chö nyi shi kyi shyuk tsul la
The actual nature as it is, beyond the ordinary mind,
ta dang gompé lé kyi tokpé drip
Is obscured by tainted notions of view and meditation.
tamal shi su sön la ta gom dral
In true ordinariness there is neither theory nor practice:
nalmé dön la bab kyi né gyur chik
May we naturally remain in the genuine condition!

gang la mikpar chawa tawé duk
To focus on anything only poisons the view,
gang shyik tsolwé zinpa gompé kyön
Deliberate fixation is but a meditative flaw,
gang la langdor chawa chöpé trang
Adopting and avoiding are perilous to action:
zukngu kun dral chö nyi tongwar shok
May we see the nature beyond such affliction!

tröpé zeb tu ma tsü rigpé dang
Directly seeing what transcends the ordinary mind:
lo dral ngönsum tong la yichö kyi
Rigpa’s radiance that’s not conceptually confined,
shyakpé kha la düpa mi dorwar
Without binding the sky in the rope of conjecture,
rangshyak nalmé dön la khé gyur chik
Let us master the genuine state of natural rest!

dé tsé rang rig shyön nu bumpa kü
The Gentle Voiced — Mañjughoṣa — of natural luminosity
khyen cha rang ösalwa jampé yang
Is the cognizance of self-awareness, the youthful vase body:
sherab rang jung drönmé nangwa yi
May the brilliant lamp of naturally arisen insight
dribpé münpa tibpo jom gyur chik
Banish the dense darkness of mind’s obscurations!

ma chö dü ma chépé chönyi la
In the nature, which is uncompounded and uncontrived,
chömé lam gyi sar du drup mépé
Nothing can be generated anew through fabricated paths,
gyu lé ma jung tartuk drébüi dön
Which is why the ultimate fruit does not arise from a cause.
rang la yé né nepa tongwar shok
May we come to see what is, and always has been, within!

yichö tsik gi punpa trulwé lam
Husk-like words of speculative ideas lead only to delusion:
jitar jö kyang tokpé drawa té
However they’re expressed, they entangle us in thought.
lung lé ma jung rang gi rig chawé
Let us practise instead the heart’s profound instructions,
mengak zabmo nying la gompar shok
Which arise not from scripture, but are intuitively known!

zung dzin sem ni ngowo nyi kyi trul
The mind of perceiver and perceived is essentially deluded.
gang tar mikpa dé shyin nyi du min
No matter what its focus, it never accords with how things are.
sem lé ma jung rangjung yeshé ku
May we attain the buddhahood of definitive reality –
ngepa dön gyi sangyé drubpar shok
The natural wisdom-kāya that does not derive from mind!

rigtong rigpé ying su chö tamché
Within the all-pervading space of rigpa, empty and aware,
nyampa nyi gyur tiklé nyak chik la
All things are equal, and, in this single, perfect sphere,
khordé ré dok shyikpé ngang tsul du
There are no longings or fears for saṃsāra or nirvāṇa:
mi né chökü tensi zinpar shok
May we capture this stronghold of unlocated dharmakāya!

di tar lü dang yul du nangwa yang
Whatever we perceive, as the body or as objects of the senses,
rab rib shyin du tokpé wang gi nang
Is like defective vision, apparent through the force of thought alone —
mi tok yeshé chenpö rang dang kyi
By means of the natural radiance of great, non-conceptual wisdom,
chö zé dömé ying su jang gyur chik
May all be purified into the original space of phenomenal exhaustion!

dé tsé kha dang nyampé yeshé ku
At that time, may we gain the ultimate, unobstructed fruition,
chok dü muta si du dro kun gyi
And, with a wisdom buddha-form as vast and limitless as the sky,
pendé dön kun jowé yishyin nor
Become wish-granting jewels, providing benefit and happiness
dripdral drébü tartuk tobpar shok
To beings everywhere, throughout the whole infinity of space and time!

This was composed at the behest of the reverend lady Dekyong Yeshe Wangmo, who is universally
renowned as an emanation of the wisdom ḍākinī, Vajravārāhī, and who, on the favourable date
of the fourth day of the third month of the Fire-Dog year (1886), offered an auspicious
silken scarf and preciously ornamented crystal rosary. With this as the condition, I, the
one known as Mipham Jampel Gyepa, or Ösel Dorje, wrote this prayer, completing it on the
very same day. Through the virtue of expressing whatever naturally arose in my mind, independently
and in the unique terminology of the Great Perfection system, may all beings attain
the level of the primordial protector, Mañjuśrī, the ever-youthful.

töpa tsam gyi ngepar drol gyur shyé
‘Merely hearing this is sure to bring liberation’ —
dorje chang gi ngakpa lam gyi chok
Thus, Vajradhara praised the supreme of paths.
di tsul sempar chépa mö chi tsal
What need is there to mention holding it in mind?
chönyi denpé nyur du drolwar gyur
May the truth of dharmatā swiftly bring liberation!

tsol ché tekpé dulwar kawé tsé
‘When it’s difficult for students to follow effort-based vehicles,
kunzang tuk kyi tenpa jung shyé su
The teachings of Samantabhadra’s wisdom-mind will arise’—
ngakpé lung shying nyingpö tenpa yi
May these essential teachings, praised in such statements,
jikten kuntu khyab ching gyé gyur chik
Pervade the whole universe, spreading everywhere, far and wide!
Sarva maṅgalam.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2017. Revised 2020.

Version: 2.1-20211125