The Powerful Prayer of Aspiration
From the Tantra of the Great Perfection that Reveals the All-Penetrating Wisdom Mind of Samantabhadra
revealed by Rigdzin Gödem

ho, nangsi khordé tamché kün
Ho! All that appears and exists, saṃsāra and nirvāṇa,
shyi chik lam nyi drebu nyi
Has one ground, two paths and two forms of fruition,
rik dang marik chotrul té
The magical displays of awareness and unawareness.
kuntuzangpö mönlam gyi
Through this, Samantabhadra’s prayer of aspiration,
tamché chöying podrang du
May all attain complete and perfect awakening
ngönpar dzok té tsang gya shok
Within the palace of dharmadhātu, the absolute sphere.

kün gyi shyi ni dümajé
The basis of everything is uncompounded,
rangjung long yang jö du mé
A self-originating expanse, vast and inexpressible,
khordé nyiké ming mé do
Beyond the names ‘saṃsāra’ and ‘nirvāṇa’.
denyi rik na sangye té
This itself, when seen, is awakening.
marik semchen khorwar khyam
But in their ignorance beings wander in saṃsāra.
kham sum semchen tamché kyi
May all sentient beings throughout the three realms
jömé shyi dön rikpar shok
Realise the meaning of the ineffable ground!

kuntuzangpo nga yi kyang
I, Samantabhadra, know the ground’s reality,
gyukyen mepa shyi yi dön
Which is without cause or condition;
denyi shyi la rangjung rik
It originates by itself within this very ground,
chinang drokur kyön matak
Is unspoilt by perspective,1 supposition or denial,
drenmé münpé drib ma gö
And unobscured by the darkness of unmindful delusion.
dechir rangnang kyön magö
That which is self-manifest is thus without fault.
rangrig so la nepa la
When abiding in genuine intrinsic awareness,
si sum jik kyang ngang trakmé
There is no fear, even at the triple world’s demise.2
döyön nga la chakpamé
Nor is there attachment to the five sensory delights.
tokmé shepa rangjung la
In self-originating awareness free of concepts,
döpé zuk dang duk nga mé
There is neither solid form nor the five poisons.3
rigpé salcha magakpa
The unobstructed clarity of awareness
ngowo chik la yeshe nga
Is one in essence and fivefold in wisdom.
yeshe ngapo minpa lé
Through the ripening of the five wisdoms,
tokmé sangye rik nga jung
The five original buddha families arise.
dé lé yeshe ta gyepé
And through wisdom’s further expansion
sangye shyibchu tsanyi jung
The forty-two peaceful buddhas emerge.4
yeshe nga yi tsal sharwé
With the upsurge of fivefold wisdom’s power,
traktung drukchu tampa jung
The sixty blood-drinking herukas appear.
dechir shyi rik trul manyong
Thus, ground awareness has never known delusion.
tokmé sangye nga yinpé
I am the primordial buddha and therefore
nga yi mönlam tabpa yi
Through this, my prayer of aspiration,
kham sum khorwé semchen gyi
May beings of saṃsāra’s three realms
rangjung rigpa ngoshé né
Recognise self-originating awareness,
yeshe chenpo ta gyé shok
So that vast wisdom may be perfected.

ngayi trulpa gyün miché
Continuously my emanations will appear
jewa trak gya samyé gyé
In their many billions, beyond imagining,
gangla gang dul natsok tön
Manifest in varied ways according to need.
nga yi tukjé mönlam gyi
Through this, my compassionate aspiration,
kham sum khorwé semchen kün
May all the beings of saṃsāra’s three realms
rik druk né né tönpar shok
Escape their plight among the six classes.

dangpo semchen trulpa nam
From the very first, since awareness does not dawn
shyi la rigpa masharwé
For deluded beings within the ground,
chiyang drenmé tomme wa
They are entirely mindless and confused.
deka marik trulpé gyu
This itself is unawareness, delusion’s cause.
dé la hé kyi gyalwa lé
And then, as if out of a sudden daze,
ngang trak shepa za zi gyü
There is anxiety and mental disquiet,
dé lé dakshyen drar dzin kyé
From which notions of self and other and enmity appear.
bakchak rimshyin tepa lé
As this habitual tendency is then reinforced,
khorwa luk su jukpa jung
Saṃsāra unfolds in its regular progression.
dé lé nyönmong duk nga gyé
Thus, mind’s afflictions, the five poisons, develop,
duk ngé lé la gyün chemé
And actions born of these five poisons never end.
dechir semchen trulpé shyi
Therefore, since the basis for beings’ delusion
drenmé marik yinpé chir
Is a lack of mindfulness, an absence of awareness,
sangye nga yi mönlam gyi
Through this, my aspiration as a buddha,
kün gyi rigpa rang shé shok
May all beings recognise their own awareness.

lhenchik kyepé marikpa
The unawareness that is co-emergent
shepa drenmé yengpa yin
Is a state of mindlessness, distraction.
küntu takpé marikpa
The unawareness that designates
dakshyen nyisu dzinpa yin
Is dualistic clinging to self and other.
lhenchik küntak marik nyi
These two, co-emergent and designating unawareness,
semchen kün gyi trul shyi yin
Provide the basis for the delusion of all beings.
sangye nga yi mönlam gyi
Now through this, my aspiration as a buddha,
khorwé semchen tamché kyi
May the dark and murky gloom of mindlessness
drenmé tibpé münpa sang
Among all sentient beings in saṃsāra be dispelled;
nyi su dzinpé shepa dang
May their dualistic perceptions be purified;
rigpé rang ngoshepar shok
And may they recognise their very own awareness.

nyidzin lo ni tetsom té
A mind of dualistic clinging is one of doubt.
shyenpa tramo kyepa lé
From subtle attachment, once it has arisen,
bakchak tukpo rimgyi té
Habitual tendencies gradually gain strength.
zé nor gö dang né dang drok
Food, wealth, clothing, home and companions,
döyön nga dang jampé nyen
The pleasures of the five senses, or dear relations—
yi ong chakpé döpé dung
Whatever is attractive brings the torment of desire.
dedak jikten trulpa té
These are the delusions of the world.
zungdzin lé la zé tamé
Actions based on dualistic clinging are unending.
shyenpé drebu minpé tsé
When the fruits of attachment come to ripen,
kam chak dungwé yidak su
They bring birth as a preta tormented by desire.
kyé né trekom ya re nga
How wretched are the pains of hunger and thirst!
sangye nga yi mönlam gyi
Now through this, my aspiration as a buddha,
döchak shyenpé semchen nam
May beings beset by craving and attachment
döpé dungwa chir mapang
Neither cast aside the torment of desire
döchak shyenpa tsur malang
Nor pursue the craving of attachment.
shepa rang sor löpa yi
But by allowing the mind to relax just as it is,
rigpa rang so zin gyur né
May they capture the natural state of awareness
küntok yeshe tobpar shok
And gain the wisdom of perfect discernment.

chirol yul gyi nangwa la
Through the subtle stirrings of anxiety and fear
jiktrak shepa tramo gyü
Towards the appearance of external objects
dangwé bakchak tepa lé
Habitual tendencies of aversion are reinforced,
drar dzin dek sö hrakpa kyé
Opening the way to enmity, injury and slaughter.
shyedang drebu minpé tsé
When the fruits of aggression come to ripen,
nyalwé tso sek duk ré ngal
How harrowing will be the boilings and burnings of hell!
sangye nga yi mönlam gyi
Now through this, my aspiration as a buddha,
dro druk semchen tamché kyi
May all the sentient beings of the six realms
shyedang drakpo kyepé tsé
Whenever they are beset by intense aggression,
panglang mija rang sor lö
Neither reject nor indulge it, but relax therein,
rigpa rang so zin gyur né
Capture the natural state of their own awareness,
salwé yeshe tobpar shok
And gain the wisdom of lucid clarity.

rangsem khengpar gyurpa la
When the mind grows conceited
shyen la drensem mepé lo
It brings thoughts of rivalry and disdain,
ngagyal drakpö sem kyepé
And the arising of intense pride
dakshyen tabtsö dukngal nyong
Leads to the suffering of quarrels and disputes.
lé dé drebu minpé tsé
When the fruits of such karma come to ripen
po tung nyongwé lha ru kyé
They bring birth as a deva subject to passage and fall.
sangye nga yi mönlam gyi
Now through this, my aspiration as a buddha,
khengsem kyepé semchen nam
May all sentient beings in whom conceit is born
detsé shepa rang sor lö
Relax their minds there and then,
rigpa rang so zin gyur né
Capture the natural state of their own awareness
nyampa nyi kyi dön tok shok
And realise the true meaning of equality.5

nyidzin tepé bakchak kyi
Habitual tendencies of intense dualistic clinging
dak tö shyen mö zuk ku lé
Bring about the pain of self-flattery and contempt,
tabtsö drensem tepa lé
And by inflaming conflict, dispute and competition,
sö chö lhamin né su kyé
Lead to birth in the asura realm of slaughter and mutilation,
drebu nyalwé né su tung
Which in turn results in descent to the domains of hell.
sangye nga yi mönlam gyi
Now through this, my aspiration as a buddha,
drensem tabtsö kyepa nam
May those in whom rivalry and antagonism take root
drar dzin mija rang sor lö
Not regard them as enemies but relax there and then,
shepa rang so zin gyur né
Capture the natural state of their own awareness
trinlé tokmé yeshe shok
And gain the wisdom of unimpeded activity.

drenmé tangnyom yengpa yi
Mindlessness, indifference, distraction,
tib dang muk dang jepa dang
Dullness, drowsiness, oblivion,
gyal dang lelo timukpé
Insensibility, laziness and stupidity
drebu kyabmé jolsong khyam
Result in helpless animal wandering.
sangye nga yi mönlam gyi
Now through this, my aspiration as a buddha,
timuk jingpé münpa la
May the light of clear cognizance arise
drenpa salwé dang sharwé
In those plunged into stupidity’s gloom,
tokmé yeshe tobpar shok
And may they gain wisdom free of thought.

kham sum semchen tamché kün
All sentient beings throughout the three realms
künshyi sangye nga dang nyam
Are equal to me, the buddha, in the ground of all,
drenmé trulpé shyi ru song
Yet for them it is but a base of mindless delusion.
danta dönmé lé la chö
And now they engage in meaningless pursuits,
lé druk milam trulpa dra
With sixfold karma as if deceived by a dream.
nga ni sangye tokma yin
Yet I am the primordial buddha,
dro druk trulpé dulwé chir
Guide to the six classes through my emanations.
kuntuzangpö mönlam gyi
Through this, Samantabhadra’s prayer of aspiration,
semchen tamché malüpa
May all sentient beings without exception
chö kyi ying su tsang gya shok
Awaken within the dharmadhātu, the absolute sphere.

a ho
Aho!
chinché naljor tobchen gyi
Henceforth, whenever a powerful yogi,
trulmé rigpa rangsal né
With naturally clear, undeluded awareness,
mönlam tobchen di tabpé
Recites this powerful aspiration,
di tö semchen tamché kün
All sentient beings who hear it
kyewa sum né ngön tsang gya
Will awaken within the course of three lives.

nyida za yi zinpa am
When Rāhu seizes the sun or moon,6
dra dang sayö jungwa am
Whenever the earth rumbles or quakes,
nyima dok gyur lopo dü
At the solstices or close of the year,
rangnyi kuntuzangpor kyé
Visualize yourself as Samantabhadra,
kün gyi tö sar di jö na
And chant this aloud so all may hear.
kham sum semchen tamché la
Then all the beings of the three realms
naljor dé yi mönlam gyi
Will, through the yogi’s prayer of aspiration,
dukngal rimshyin drol né kyang
Gradually be freed from their suffering
ta ru sangye tobpar gyur
And ultimately awaken as a buddha.7

This was extracted from the nineteenth chapter of the Tantra of the Great Perfection that Reveals
the All-Penetrating Wisdom Mind of Samantabhadra, which teaches that through making
a powerful prayer of aspiration all sentient beings cannot but awaken.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2019.

Version: 1.3-20211119
↑ Literally ‘by outer and inner’.↑ An alternative version of this line reads: There is no fear,
even at the triple world’s alarm (’jigs).↑ Some versions of this line have colour (kha
dog) in place of the five poisons (dug lnga).↑ Note that the word ‘peaceful’ here is only
implied in the original Tibetan.↑ An alternative version of this line reads: And realise
the wisdom of equality.↑ In other words, during a solar or lunar eclipse.↑ An alternative
version of this line reads: And swiftly awaken as a buddha.