The Pure Three Kāyas Ablaze in Perfect Splendour
A Prayer Based on the Meaning of the Great Perfection
by Longchen Rabjam

om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
ku sum dakpé shying kham su
In the pure realms of the three kāyas,
chinlap ngödrup punsum tsok
Blessings and attainments are in perfect abundance.
gyalwa gong gyü lama la
To the gurus of the victorious ones' mind-direct transmission,
solwa depso chin gyi lop
We pray: inspire us with your blessings!

durtrö chenpö né chok tu
In the supreme places of the great charnel grounds,
chok dang tünmong ngödrup nyé
You gained supreme and ordinary attainments.
rigdzin dagyü lama la
To the gurus of the vidyādharas' sign transmission,
solwa depso chin gyi lop
We pray: inspire us with your blessings!

ngödrup jungwé drup né su
In places of accomplishment, sources of attainment,
rang shyen dön nyi punsum tsok
Your own and others' welfare is perfectly secured.
gangzak nyengyü lama la
To the gurus of the individuals' whispered transmission,
solwa depso chin gyi lop
We pray: inspire us with your blessings!

tukpo köpé shying kham su
In the realm of Ghanavyūha, 'Dense Array',
tamché ku dang yeshe dang
Everything appears as kāyas and wisdoms.
yidam shyi tro rabjam la
To the infinite yidam deities, peaceful and wrathful,
solwa depso chin gyi lop
We pray: inspire us with your blessings!

né dang nyéwé shying kham su
In sacred places and associated realms,
ngödrup yishyin char bebpé
You bring a wish-granting rain of accomplishments.
dechen khandro rik nga la
To the five families of the ḍākinīs of great bliss,
solwa depso chin gyi lop
We pray: inspire us with your blessings!

namdak drubpé shying kham su
In realms of utterly pure accomplishment,
tu tob dzutrul paktu mé
Your power, strength and miraculous abilities are beyond measure.
khandro damchen gyatso la
To the hosts of ḍākinīs and oath-bound guardians,
solwa depso chin gyi lop
We pray: inspire us with your blessings!

dö né dakpa chö kyi ying
To the primordially pure dharmadhātu,
gyurmé rigpé long yang su
The vast expanse of changeless awareness,
né rang nang ösal omin la
In which the Akaniṣṭha realm of clear light naturally appears,
solwa depso chin gyi lop
We pray: inspire us with your blessings!

rang rig dö né sangyé la
In our own pure awareness, primordially enlightened,
ku dang yeshe lhun gyi drup
The kāyas and wisdoms are spontaneously present.
tönpa yé né puntsok la
To this teacher, perfect from the beginning,
solwa depso chin gyi lop
We pray: inspire us with your blessings!

chir nang rangjung yeshe ngang
To the state in which whatever appears is self-arising wisdom,
rang nang rigpa tsombur ché
Naturally manifest awareness is complete with maṇḍala gatherings,
khor kun yé né lhun dzok la
And all that surrounds us is, and always has been, spontaneously perfect,
solwa depso chin gyi lop
We pray: inspire us with your blessings!

nyam dzok chang chub sem kyi ngang
To this perfect equality, the state of awakening mind,
yé né lhundrup gyudré dé
Spontaneously and primordially present, beyond cause and effect,
chö kun yé né dzogchen la
Wherein all phenomena are, and always have been, the Great Perfection:
solwa depso chin gyi lop
We pray: inspire us with your blessings!

tamché gyurmé dakpé long
The pure expanse wherein all is unchanging,
takpa gyün gyi khorlö shyi
The ground of continuously present eternity —
dü shyi gyün gyi khorlo la
To this fourth time, forever unfolding,
solwa depso chin gyi lop
We pray: inspire us with your blessings!

chir nang ku dang yeshé dang
Whatever appears manifests as kāyas and wisdoms,
drak tong kyé mé chö kyi dra
Emptiness is heard as the unborn sound of Dharma,
dren rig yé né sangyé tuk
And thoughts are the primordially awakened wisdom mind.
solwa depso chin gyi lop
To such a state, we pray: inspire us with blessings!

rang nang rigpé longchen dir
In this great expanse of naturally manifesting awareness,
nangsi nöchü namdakpé
Appearance and existence are the pure vessel and its contents,
khorwa ma pang dongtruk su
And saṃsāra is not rejected but emptied from its very depths.
solwa depso chin gyi lop
To such a state, we pray: inspire us with blessings!

rang rig kha nyam longchen du
In the great, sky-like expanse of our own awareness,
ku sum ma tsal yé dzokpé
The three kāyas are not to be sought, but are already perfect,
nyangdé ma drup lhundrup la
And nirvāṇa, even without being cultivated, is spontaneously present.
solwa depso chin gyi lop
To such a state, we pray: inspire us with blessings!

chö kun changchup sem kyi long
All dharmas within the expanse of awakening mind
ma jang ma drö lhun gyi drup
Are neither purified nor gradually attained, but spontaneously perfect.
tamché yé né sangyé la
To this state, in which all is buddhahood from the very beginning,
solwa depso chin gyi lop
We pray: inspire us with blessings!

rigpa kadak chökü long
To primordially pure awareness, the expanse of dharmakāya,
zangtal jenpar solwa dep
Which is transparent and nakedly clear, we pray!

gyadrol barmé chalwé ngang
A state that is unbounded, uninterrupted and pervasive —
dzokpa chenpor chin gyi lop
Inspire us to realize the Great Perfection!

yeshé lhundrup ösal long
Spontaneously present wisdom, the expanse of clear light —
ying nang dakpar chin gyi lop
Inspire us to realize the pure manifestations of absolute space!

char shyi ma gak trulpé long
The expanse of manifestation that is the basis for ceaseless arising —
zung dzin dakpar chin gyi lop
Inspire us to realize the purity of dualistic grasping!

chö kun rangjung rigpé long
The expanse in which all phenomena are self-arising, pure awareness —
bé mé yongdrol chin gyi lop
Inspire us to realize the total freedom that is beyond all effort!

gyudré langdor chatsol dé
Transcending cause and effect, adoption or avoidance, effort or exertion —
shyi dzok chökur chin gyi lop
Inspire us to realize the perfect ground of dharmakāya!

tamché nyam dzok changchub long
The expanse of awakening in which all is perfect equality —
kham sum yongdrol chin gyi lop
Inspire us to realize the complete liberation of the three realms!

lama yidam khandro la
To the gurus, yidam deities and ḍākinīs,
rangshyen dön du solwa dep
For our own and others' sake, we pray:
gongpa chönyi zésar kyol
Inspire us to reach the realization in which all dissolves into dharmatā,
dön nyi dzokpar chin gyi lop
And thereby to perfect the two-fold benefit of ourselves and others!

ying ka né dakpa chö zé ngang
The space of primordial purity, wherein ordinary phenomena are exhausted,
lo dé chökur zangtal lé
Dharmakāya beyond the conceptual mind, in which all is transparent and clear —
kagyü lamé chin gyi lop
Gurus of the oral lineage: inspire us with your blessings!
tsawé lamé tukjé zung
Root guru, hold us in your compassion!

rang nang ösal longkü shying
The sambhogakāya realm of self-appearing luminosity,
ku dang tiklé mé ré ré
Wherein the buddha-forms and light-spheres shimmer and glow —
kagyü lamé chin gyi lop
Gurus of the oral lineage: inspire us with your blessings!
tsawé lamé tukjé zung
Root guru, hold us in your compassion!

ying rig kha tar dakpé long
The immaculate, sky-like expanse of space and awareness,
ösal lung sem namdak tu
The clear light in which prāṇa-mind is utterly pure —
kagyü lamé chin gyi lop
Gurus of the oral lineage: inspire us with your blessings!
tsawé lamé tukjé zung
Root guru, hold us in your compassion!

tamché zabmö chönyi long
So that all may reach the profound expanse of dharmatā,
chi sam yishyin lhundrup tu
Wherein each and every wish is spontaneously fulfilled,
kagyü lamé chin gyi lop
Lamas of the oral lineage: inspire us with your blessings!
tsawé lamé tukjé zung
Root guru, hold us in your compassion!

This concludes the great prayer entitled “The Pure Three Kāyas Ablaze in Perfect Splendour”,
which Longchen Rabjam, a yogi of the supreme vehicle, set down in the isolated place of Lhundrup
Ling in response to the repeated entreaties of several yogis of the Great Perfection.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2017.

Source: dri med 'od zer. "rdzogs chen don gyi gsol 'debs phun tshogs dpal 'bar/" in gsung thor
bu/_dri med 'od zer/(sde dge par ma/). 2 vols. Paro, Bhutan: Lama Ngodrup and Sherab Drimey,
1982. Vol. 2: 447–450

Version: 1.2-20220112