The Prayer of the Ground, Path & Fruition
from the Heart-Essence of the Vast Expanse

pal kuntu zangpo la chak tsal lo
Homage to glorious Samantabhadra!

dömé neluk rangshyin trö dangdral
The true nature of things is naturally free of conceptual projections.
yöpa mayin gyalwé di ma zik
It does not exist, since even the victorious ones do not see it.
mepa mayin khordé kün gyi shyi
Yet neither is it non-existent, as it is the ground of all saṃsāra and nirvāṇa.
galdu mayin jöjé yul lé dé
There is no contradiction here, for it lies beyond the realm of expression.
dzogchen shyi yi neluk tokpar shok
May all realize this Great Perfection, the true nature of the ground!

ngowo tongpé takpé ta lé drol
In essence it is empty, hence free from the limitations of permanence.
rangshyin salwé chepé mu dangdral
By nature it is clear, and free from the limitations of nihilism.
tukjé gakmé natsok trulpé shyi
Its capacity unobstructed, it is the ground of manifold emanations.
sum du yé yang dön la ta mi dé
It is divided into three, yet in truth there are no such differentiations.
dzogchen shyi yi neluk tokpar shok
May all realize this Great Perfection, the true nature of the ground!

sam gyi mi khyab drondok kün dangdral
Inconceivable and free of all superimposition, one-sided fixation
yö dang mepé chok dzin nampar shyik
On things being either existent or non-existent completely dissolves.
di dön jö la gyalwé jak kyang duk
The full import of this turns back even the tongue of the victors.
tok ta bar mé tingsal chenpö ying
Without beginning, middle, or end, it is a great expanse of deep clarity.
dzogchen shyi yi neluk tokpar shok
May all realize this Great Perfection, the true nature of the ground!

rang ngo namdak kyemé kadak la
Its essence is pristine, unoriginated, and primordially pure.
lhündrub dümajepé dang sharwa
Whatever manifests is the expression of this unconditioned spontaneous presence.
güdu ma zung riktong zungjuk cher
Without perceiving them as other, realizing the great unity of awareness-emptiness,
tokpé shyi yi gongpa tsé du chin
One’s understanding of the ground will reach a point of culmination.
lam gyi né la gol chok mepar shok
May there be no deviations and mistakes concerning this key point of the path!

yené dakpé tawé ming yangmé
Pure from the beginning, even the term “view” does not exist.
rang ngo rigpé gom gyü shub né dön
Aware of the original state, the sheath of meditation falls away.
zaté mepé chöpé drok dangdral
There are no reference points, hence no need to restrain one’s conduct.
rangshyin lhum shyuk trödral jenpé ngang
In the spontaneously present nature, this state of naked simplicity,
lam gyi né la gol chok mepar shok
May there be no deviations and mistakes concerning this key point of the path!

zang ngen namtok chok su ma lhung shying
Not falling into partiality towards positive thoughts or negative ones,
tangnyom lungmaten du ma jampar
And without giving free rein to a state of indifferent neutrality,
shardrol rimé gya yen lhün jam long
Manifestation and liberation—an expanse unrestricted, unbridled, and spontaneously free.
panglang yé zé rangshyin yong shé ngang
Understanding that the nature is inherently devoid of needing to accept and reject,
lam gyi né la gol chok mepar shok
May there be no deviations and mistakes concerning this key point of the path!

tokmé chi shyi namkha tabü ngang
Like space, awareness is the universal ground and starting point.
shyi nang rigpa kha la trin deng shyin
Manifest ground spontaneously present, yet vanishing like clouds in the sky,
chisal shepa nang du dokpa lé
The mind radiates out, projecting outwards and then returning within
khyechö drukden shyönnu bumkü bub
To the youthful vase body’s inner space, possessing six unique characteristics—
drebü gyalpo tsensa zinpar shok
May all seize the throne of this majestic fruition!

yené rangrik kuntuzangpo la
From the very beginning, awareness itself is Samantabhadra.
tob jé shendö tadak ying su yal
Within it, all hoping for attainments dissolves into the sphere of reality,
jatsol lodé dzokpa chenpö shi
The true character of the Great Perfection, beyond intentional effort;
yingrik kuntuzangmö kha long bub
The sphere of reality and awareness, the inner space of Samantabhadrī—
drebü gyalpo tsensa zinpar shok
May all seize the throne of this majestic fruition!

rabtu miné uma chenpö dön
Utterly non-abiding—the nature of the Great Middle Way;
khyab dal lhün jam chakgya chenpö ngang
All-embracing and spontaneously vast—the state of Mahāmudrā;
ta drol long yang dzokpa chenpö né
Freed from limitations and wide open—the key point of the Great Perfection.
salam yönten shyir dzok lhündrub bub
The virtues of the levels and paths fundamentally complete—spontaneously present inner space.
drebü gyalpo tsensa zinpar shok
May all seize the throne of this majestic fruition!

This profound prayer, a summation of the sealOf the quintessential vast expanse,Was set down
at the behest of the protector of the teachings,The Rishi Rāhula, who took the form of a
monk.To make meaningful the spread of the profound realityAnd bring to perfection this prayer
of interdependence,I let loose this profound seal to the mad yogi of Kong.Entrusting it
to this hidden master of awarenessWho himself has been blessed by Ākāśagarbha.May its benefit
for beings equal the extent of space!

| Translated by Cortland Dahl, 2006.

Version: 1.4-20220110