The Essence of Mind

by Mipham Rinpoche

Namo Guru Mañjuśrīye!

The actual nature of things is inconceivable and inexpressible. Yet, for those fortunate individuals
who seek to penetrate the profound meaning of dharmatā, I shall here offer a few
words by way of illustration.

What we call “essence of mind” is the actual face of unconditioned pure awareness, which is
recognized through receiving the guru's blessings and instructions. If you wonder what this
is like, it is empty in essence, beyond conceptual reference; it is cognizant by nature,
spontaneously present; and it is all-pervasive and unobstructed in its compassionate energy.
This is the rigpa in which the three kāyas are inseparable.

It is therefore as the vidyādhara Garab Dorje said in his Final Testament:

This rigpa, which has no concrete existence as anything at all,Is completely unobstructed in
the arising of its self-appearances.

To summarize: the actual nature of mind—the way it has always been, in and of itself—is this
innate pure awareness that is unfabricated and unrestricted.

When this is explained in negative terms:

It is not something to be apprehended;Nor is it a non-existent void;It is not some combination
of these two,Nor is it a third option that is neither.

This is the view of the absence of any identifiable existence, the fact that it cannot be conceptualised
in any way by thinking, “It is like this.”

When explained in more positive, experiential terms, it is said to be glaringly empty, lucidly
clear, vividly pure, perfectly even, expansively open, and so on.

To illustrate this using examples: without limit or centre, it is like space; in its unlimited
clarity, it is like sunlight flooding the sky; without clear inside and outside, it is
like a crystal ball; in its freedom from clinging and attachment, it is like the traces of
a bird in flight; and neither arising nor ceasing, it is like the sky.

To dispel any doubts or misunderstandings that might arise from this instruction, it is described
as the great clarity that is beyond partiality, the great emptiness of freedom from
conceptual reference, the great union that cannot be separated, and so on.

In terms of its meaning, as it cannot be pointed out by words, it is inexpressible; as it cannot
be known with ordinary modes of consciousness, it is inconceivable; and as it is does
not fall into any extreme, it is the great freedom from elaboration. In the end, it is beyond
all expressions, such as: it is all and everything, it is not all, everything lies within
it, or does not, and so on. It remains an individual experience of self-knowing awareness.


The names used to illustrate it are 'primordial purity' (ka dag) and 'spontaneous presence'
(lhun grub), and, when summarizing: 'the single, all-encompassing sphere of naturally arising
wisdom' (rang byung ye shes thig le nyag gcig).

As it is the pinnacle of all in terms of the qualities it possesses, it is also the transcendent
perfection of wisdom (prajñāpāramitā) and so on.

Symbolically, it can be revealed by means of the sun, or a magnifying glass, a crystal ball,
or a finger pointing into space, and so forth.

When you have a precious jewel in your own hand,Even if others should discard them, why be angry?Without
losing your connection to these instructions,The pinnacle of Dharma, and your
own good fortune,Even if others should criticize them, why be angry?

By Mipham.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2016, with the kind assistance of Alak Zenkar Rinpoche.